feat: add spec for namespace configs (#883)
ory/keto: docs/ory_permission_language_spec.md

# The "Ory Permission Language" Specification

Enforcing fine-grained permissions is a critical building block of mature
technology solutions that protect privacy and identity in the information age. A
number of proprietary languages to represent permission already exists, namely
the [Authzed Schema Language](https://docs.authzed.com/reference/schema-lang)

> and [Auth0 FGA](https://docs.fga.dev/). Many permissions are defined by normal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and [Auth0 FGA](https://docs.fga.dev/). Most permissions are defined by normal
```

developers who typically are most familiar with web technologies like JavaScript
or Typescript. We therefore see the need for a developer-friendly configuration
language for permissions that has such a small learning curve that it can be

> picked up, used, and understood with confidence by most developers. We therefore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
picked up, used, and understood with confidence by most developers. We
```

| Operator | Example                                  | Semantic                      |
| -------- | ---------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| `(`, `)` | `x()`                                    | call function `x`             |
| `[]`     | `T[]`                                    | `T` is an array type          |
| `{`, `}` | `class x {}`                             | Scope delimiters              |
| `=>`     | `list.some(el => f(el))`                 | Lambda definition token.      |
| `.`      | `this.x`                                 | Property traversal token      |
| `:`      | `relation: type`                         | Relation/type separator token |
| `=`      | `permits = {...}`                        | Assignment token              |
| `,`      | `{x: 1, y: 2}`                           | Property separator            |
| `'`      | `'string'`                               | Single quoted string literal  |
| `"`      | `"string"`                               | Double quoted string literal  |
| `*`      | `import * from @ory/permission-language` | Import glob                   |

## Statements

### Type declaration

> The top level of the configuration consists of a list of `class` declaration for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The top level of the configuration consists of a list of `class` declarations for
```

each namespace. Each `class` consists of relation declarations and permission
declarations.

```ebnf
Config          = [ ClassDecl ] .
ClassDecl       = "class" identifier "implements" "Namespace" "{" ClassSpec "}" .
ClassSpec       = [ RelationDecls ] | [ PermissionDefns] .
```

> The following example declares a type _User_ that is never the object in any
> relation. It can, however, be the subject of a relation, the relation being
> declared on some other type.

Reviewer: I think leaving out this object-subject stuff makes this more clear.

```suggestion
The following example declares a type _User_.
```

```ts
class User implements Namespace {}
```

### Relation declaration

> Inside the class declaration, relations are declared. `RelationName` must be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relations are defined inside the class declaration. `RelationName` must be
```

> unique identifiers and are used as the relation strings in the tuples. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unique identifiers used as the relation strings in the tuples. The
```

> `TypeName` must be the name of a `type` that is defined above or below (in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`TypeName` must be the name of an already defined `type` (in
```

_parent_ has type _Document_.

```ts
class User {}

class Document {
  related = {
    parents: Document[]
    owners: User[]
    viewers: User[]
  }
}
```

### Permission definition

Permissions are defined as functions within class declarations that take a
parameter `ctx` of type `Context` and evaluate to a boolean `true` or `false`.

The type annotations for `ctx` and the return value are optional.

```ebnf
PermissionDefns = "permits" "=" "{" Permission [ "," Permission ] "}" .
Permission      = PermissionSign "=>" PermissionBody .
PermissionSign  = PermissionName ":" "(" "ctx" [ ":" "Context" ] ")" [ ":" "boolean" ] .
PermissionName  = identifier .
```

The `ctx` object is a fixed parameter that contains the `subject` for which the
permission check should be conducted:

```ts
ctx = { subject: "some_user_id" }
```

In the future, more context fields could be added here, e.g., the IP range or
geolocation, the time of day, or the security level of the device making the
request.

```ebnf
PermissionBody  = ( "(" PermissionBody ")" ) | ( PermissionCheck | { Operator PermissionBody } ) .
Operator        = "||" | "&&" .
PermissionCheck = TransitiveCheck | IncludesCheck .
```

> The body of a permission check is either one of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The body of a permission check is either one of:
```

- a `IncludesCheck`, a check that something is in a set, e.g.,
  `this.related.viewers.includes(ctx.subject)`:

```ebnf
IncludesCheck   = "this" "." "related" "." RelationName "." "includes" "(" "ctx" "." "subject" ")" .
```

- a `TranstitiveCheck`, a call to a permission on a relation, e.g.,
  `this.related.parents.some(p => p.permits.view(ctx))`:

```ebnf
TransitiveCheck = "this" "." "related" "." RelationName "." "some" "(" Var "=>" PermissionCall ")" .
PermissionCall  = Var "." "permits" "." PermissionName "(" "ctx" ")" .
Var             = identifier .
```

#### Implementation note

> `IncludeCheck` and `TransitiveCheck` will be translated to Zanzibar concepts as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`IncludeCheck` and `TransitiveCheck` translate to Zanzibar concepts as
```

alternatives. The horizontal ellipsis `…` is also used elsewhere in the spec to
informally denote various enumerations or code snippets that are not further
specified.

## Configuraton text representation

The configuration is encoded in UTF-8.

## Lexical elements

### Comments

1. Line comments start with the character sequence `//` and stop at the end of
   the line.
2. General comments start with the character sequence `/*` and stop with the
   first subsequent character sequence `*/`.
3. Documentation comments start with the character sequence `/**` and stop with
   the first subsequent character sequence `*/`.

### Identifiers

Identifiers name program entities such as variables and types. An identifier is
a sequence of one or more letters and digits. The first character in an
identifier must be a letter.

```ebnf
identifier = letter { letter | digit } .
digit      = "0" … "9" .
letter     = "A" … "Z" | "a" … "z" | "_" .
```

### String literals

String literals represent string constants as sequences of characters.

```ebnf
string_lit    = single_quoted | double_quoted .
single_quoted = "'" { letter | digit } "'" .

> double_quoted = '"' { letter | digit } '"' .

Reviewer: Can strings contain spaces too?

Author: Ah, now that we removed metadata we don't have to have this in the spec at all!

| `"`      | `"string"`                               | Double quoted string literal  |
| `*`      | `import * from @ory/permission-language` | Import glob                   |
| `\|`     | `User[]`                                 | Document[]                    |

## Statements

### Type declaration

The top level of the configuration consists of a list of `class` declarations
for each namespace. Each `class` consists of relation declarations and
permission declarations.

```ebnf
Config          = [ ClassDecl ] .
ClassDecl       = "class" identifier "implements" "Namespace" "{" ClassSpec "}" .
ClassSpec       = [ RelationDecls ] | [ PermissionDefns] .
```

The following example declares a type _User_.

```ts
class User implements Namespace {}
```

### Relation declaration

The `related` section of type declarations defines relations. Unlike regular
TypeScript, `RelationName` must be a unique identifier used as the relation
strings in the tuples. The `TypeName` must be the name of another `type` that is
defined above or below (in TypeScript: a class that implements `Namespace`).

Type unions (`|`) can be used to denote that a relation can have subjects of

> multiple types, e.g., `viewers: User[] | Group[]`.

Reviewer: Wow this is cool!
